.Dd $Mdocdate: December 25 2015 $
.Dt INSTALLATION 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm installation
.Nd operating system installation instructions
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This document describes how to install Sortix on a computer from a cdrom
release.  Please read it through carefully before beginning the installation so
you know what to expect and things you need to keep in mind.  The
.Xr upgrade 7
manual page covers upgrading an existing installation.
.Ss Prerequisites
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
A
.Pa sortix-x.y-arch.iso
release for your architecture.
.It
A cdrom onto which the release has been burned, or USB portable storage onto
which the release has been placed at the first byte and onwards.
.It
A computer meeting the system requirements.
.El
.Ss System Requirements
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
32-bit x86 CPU with SSE (i686 release), or 64-bit x86 CPU (x86_64 release).
.It
1 GiB RAM (recommended) to run iso live environment (including installer) with
all ports loaded, or significantly less if unimportant ports are not loaded.  An
installation on a harddisk will require very little RAM to run after
installation.
.It
ATA or AHCI harddisk with at least 1 GiB of unpartitioned space.
.It
BIOS firmware, or UEFI firmware in legacy mode.
.It
PS/2 keyboard/mouse firmware emulation to use those devices.
.It
If you wish to dual boot, you need an existing operating system with a multiboot
compliant bootloader such as GRUB.
.El
.Ss Preparation
Read this document through before beginning the installation.  The installation
process is designed to be reasonable, but you need to patient and in an
emotionally stable place.  It is important you understand the current
limitations of the system and carefully consider whether you want to go through
with the installation at this time.
.Pp
Before installing any operating system, be sure to have backed up local data in
the event something goes wrong.  This operating system comes without any
warranty at all (see the license).
.Pp
Consider the partitioning scheme and whether you wish to dual boot.  Consult the
partitioning instructions below. If dual-booting and there isn't enough
unpartitioned space, use the native partition editor of the existing operating
system to shrink its installation.
.Pp
Determine how the target machine will boot the release.  If the firmware
supports usb-iso hybrid images, you can use
.Xr dd 1
or such to copy the release physically onto a USB portable storage device.
If the target machine has a cdrom drive, you can burn the release to a cdrom.
Insert the installation medium in the computer and power it on.  If needed,
change the boot order in the firmware to prefer the installation medium over any
existing operating system installations.
.Pp
After the installation is complete, remove the installation medium and restore
the firmware boot order to prioritize the local harddisk.  Then power the
computer on normally to run the new operating system.
.Ss Qemu
Virtual machines are a well-supported installation target.  For instance, to
prepare a 1 GiB harddisk and install the operating system onto it, run something
like:
.Bd -literal
qemu-img create sortix.raw 1G
qemu-system-x86_64 -enable-kvm -m 1024 -vga std -cdrom sortix.iso \\
                   -drive file=sortix.raw,format=raw
.Ed
.Pp
After the installation is complete, power off the computer and remove the
.Ar -cdrom
.Pa sortix.iso
option.
.Ss Bootloader Menu
Booting the release will present you with a GRUB bootloader menu.  You have
three primary options:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Running a fully-featured temporary live environment.
.It
Running the operating system installer
.Xr ( sysinstall 8 ) .
.It
Upgrading an existing installation to this release
.Xr ( sysupgrade 8 ) .
.El
.Pp
Each of these options are a live environment running exclusively in RAM.  The
difference is only what program is run after the system has booted.  The
bootloader will load the whole operating system and ports into memory from the
installation medium.  This may take a moment.  You need enough memory to store
the whole system and the runtime usage.  If the system memory is really
insufficient, then the bootloader may have strange behavior, take a really long
time to load, or not complete the boot at all.
.Pp
You can configure which ports gets loaded using the bootloader menu.  The base
system is rather lean and can be made quite small.  You need some ports to
complete an installation.
.Ss Installer
This guide assumes you selected the operating system installation option in the
bootloader.  If not, you can run the installer by running the
.Xr sysinstall 8
command.
.Pp
The installer is an interactive command line program that asks you questions and
you answer them.  It provides useful information you shouldn't accidentally
overlook.  Before answering any question, read all output since your last
answer.
.Pp
You should have this installation guide ready at all times.  You can view this
.Xr installation 7
page during the installation by answering
.Sy '!man'
to any regular prompt (excluding password prompts).  Likewise you can answer
.Sy '!'
to get an interactive shell.  Upon completion, you will be asked the question
again.
.Ss Keyboard Layout
You need to choose the applicable keyboard layout.  By default, a standard US
keyboard layout is used.  You can view a list of keyboard layouts if you wish.
This layout is then loaded and the preference will be stored in
.Xr kblayout 5 .
.Ss Display Resolution
If a driver exists for your graphics card, then you will be asked for your
preferred display resolution by
.Xr chvideomode 1 .
The display will then use this resolution and your preference will be stored in
.Xr videomode 5 .
.Ss Bootloader
The
.Xr kernel 7
is a multiboot compatible binary that can be loaded by any multiboot
specification compatible bootloader such as GRUB.  You need to use such a
bootloader to boot the operating system.  You will be offered the choice of
installing GRUB as the bootloader.  Note however that this GRUB is not able to
detect other operating systems and you will have to configure it manually if you
wish to use it in a dual boot scheme.  The answer will default to yes if no
existing partitions are found, and will default to no if some are found.
.Pp
Single-boot configurations should use the offered bootloader.  Dual-boot
configurations should refuse it and arrange for bootloading by other means.  The
installer will generate
.Pa /etc/grub.d/10_sortix.cache
which is a fragment of GRUB configuration that offers the menu option of running
Sortix.  You can splice that into
.Pa /etc/grub.d/40_custom
of an existing GRUB installation and run
.Xr update-grub 8
to add it as a boot option.
.Pp
If you accept the bootloader, you will be asked if you wish to password protect
the bootloader.  If you don't, anyone able to use the keyboard during system
bootloading will be trivially able to gain root access using the bootloader
command line.  If you use this, you should also password protect the firmware and
prohibit it from booting from anything but the harddisk.  An attacker will then
need to tamper with the computer itself physically.  The password will be hashed
and stored in
.Xr grubpw 5
and is inserted into the GRUB configuration when
.Xr update-grub 8
is run.
.Ss Partitioning
You will now need to set up a partition for the root filesystem and other
filesystems you wish to use.  The installer will give you instructions and run
the
.Xr disked 8
partitioning program.  You can view its man page by typing
.Sy man
and you can view this man page by typing
.Sy man 7 installation .
.Pp
.Nm disked
defaults to the first detected harddisk as the current harddisk.  You can switch
to another harddisk using the
.Sy device Ar device-name
command.  You can view all devices with the
.Sy devices
command.
.Pp
If the current device does not already have a partition table, you can create a
.Xr mbr 7
or
.Xr gpt 7
partition table using the
.Sy mktable
command.
.Xr gpt 7
is the preferred choice for new partition tables as
.Xr mbr 7 has unfortunate limitations.
If you are dissatisfied with the current partition table, you can use
the
.Sy rmtable
command which will destroy the partition table and effectively delete all data
on the harddisk.
.Pp
The
.Sy ls
command to lists all partitions and unused space on the current device.
The
.Sy mkpart
command creates a partition.  You will be asked interactive questions to
determine its location.  You will be asked if you wish to format a filesystem.
.Nm ext2
is the native filesystem. If applicable, you will be asked if you wish to create
a mountpoint for it in
.Xr fstab 5 .
The
.Sy rmpart Ar partition-number
command removes a partition table entry and effectively deletes all data on the
partition.
.Pp
If the device containing the root filesystem uses the GPT partitioning scheme,
and you accepted the included bootloader, then you must create a
.Sy biosboot
partition onto which the bootloader is installed.  It should be at the start of
the harddisk and a size of 1 MiB will be more than sufficient.
.Pp
You need to make a partition containing the root filesystem mounted at
.Pa / .
A size of 1 GiB will be comfortable for the base system and ports and basic
usage.  There is no inherent need for a
.Pa /home
partition so you are encouraged to make the root filesystem as large as you
wish.  Operating systems upgrades will preserve the root filesystem and the
installer handles installing on top of an existing installation and preserves
user files and local configuration.
.Pp
Type
.Sy exit
when you are done to continue the installation.  If the installer detects a
problem with your partitioning, it will offer to run
.Xr disked 8
again.
.Ss Installation
The installer will show its installation intentions ask you to confirm the
installation.  If you answer yes, then the installation will begin.
.Pp
The installer will copy the live environment into the target root filesystem
according to the file lists in
.Pa /tix/manifest
and create configuration files matching your earlier choices.  It will generate
an initrd that locates and boots the root filesystem.  It will install the
bootloader if desired.  The installation will take a moment.
.Ss Configuration
After the installation is complete, a bare system is installed but it lacks
crucial configuration files and it will refuse to start when booted.
.Ss Hostname
You will be asked for the hostname of the new system which be stored in
.Xr hostname 5 .
This question is skipped if the file already exits.
.Ss Root
You will be asked for the root password.  A root account is made in
.Xr passwd 5
and
.Xr group 5 .
This question is skipped if the root account already exists.
.Ss Users
You will be asked in a loop if you wish to make another user.  Answer
.Sy no
when you are done.  Otherwise enter the name of the new account.  If you wish to
create an account by the name of
.Li no
then simply add a space in front as leading spaces are trimmed.
.Pp
You will then be asked for the full name and the password for the new user.  A
user directory will be made in
.Pa /home .
The new user is added to
.Xr passwd 5
and
.Xr group 5 .
.Pp
Please note that Sortix is not currently secure as a multi-user system and
filesystem permissions are not enforced.
.Ss Completion
This will complete the operating system installation. Upon reboot, the new
system will start normally. After powering off your system, you need to remove
the installation medium and if applicable restore boot priorities in your
firmware. If you did not accept the bootloader, you will need to manually
configure a bootloader to boot the new operating system.
.Pp
You will be given the choice between powering off the system, rebooting it, or
directly booting the new system. The last option will directly boot the new
system in a chroot while the live environment remains in the background. If you
invoked
.Xr sysinstall 8
yourself, then you will be returned to your live environment shell. Otherwise
the computer will power off when the chroot environment terminates.
.Pp
Upon boot of the new system it will be configured in multi-user mode and you
will be presented with a login screen. Authenticate as one of the local users
and you will be given a shell. To power off the computer login as user
.Sy poweroff
and to reboot the computer login as user
.Sy reboot .
.Pp
The
.Xr user-guide 7
manual page is a basic overview of the system for new users.
.Pp
Congratulations on your new Sortix system.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr chkblayout 1 ,
.Xr chvideomode 1 ,
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr fstab 5 ,
.Xr group 5 ,
.Xr grubpw 5 ,
.Xr kblayout 5 ,
.Xr passwd 5 ,
.Xr videomode 5 ,
.Xr development 7 ,
.Xr gpt 7 ,
.Xr initrd 7 ,
.Xr kernel 7 ,
.Xr mbr 7 ,
.Xr upgrade 7 ,
.Xr user-guide 7 ,
.Xr disked 8 ,
.Xr fsck 8 ,
.Xr init 8 ,
.Xr sysinstall 8 ,
.Xr sysupgrade 8 ,
.Xr update-grub 8 ,
.Xr update-initrd 8
