.Dd $Mdocdate: January 5 2016 $
.Dt UPGRADE 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm upgrade
.Nd operating system upgrade instructions
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This document describes how to upgrade an existing Sortix installation to a
newer release.  The
.Xr installation 7
manual page covers creating a new installation.
.Ss Prerequisites
You need to prepare a bootable medium with the new release as described in
.Xr installation 7 .
Read all the instructions up to Bootloader Menu and continue with this document.
.Pp
It is not possible to skip releases. If you want to upgrade to a release, you
must upgrade first to all releases before that one. If the existing installation
is a development snapshot, you must either upgrade to a newer development
snapshot of that version, or a the final release of that version.
.Ss Bootloader Menu
Pick the
.Li upgrade existing installation
option in the bootloader menu to begin the upgrade.  This will load a live
environment set to automatically run the
.Xr sysupgrade 8
program.
.Ss Upgrader
This guide assumes you selected the upgrade option in the bootloader.  If not,
you can run the installer by running the
.Xr sysupgrade 8
command.
.Pp
The upgrader is an interactive command line program that asks you questions and
you answer them.  It provides useful information you shouldn't accidentally
overlook.  Before answering any question, read all output since your last
answer.
.Pp
You should have this upgrade guide ready at all times.  You can view this
.Xr upgrade 7
page during the installation by answering
.Sy '!man'
to any regular prompt (excluding password prompts).  Likewise you can answer
.Sy '!'
to get an interactive shell.  Upon completion, you will be asked the question
again.
.Ss Keyboard Layout
You need to choose the applicable keyboard layout.  By default, a standard US
keyboard layout is used.  You can view a list of keyboard layouts if you wish.
.Ss Display Resolution
If a driver exists for your graphics card, then you will be asked for your
preferred display resolution by
.Xr chvideomode 1 .
.Ss Installation Search
The upgrader will search for existing Sortix installations by probing local
filesystems for
.Pa /etc/sortix-release .
You will be asked which installation you wish to upgrade.  Enter the name of the
root filesystem device.  If none are found, it asks if you want to run
.Xr sysinstall 8 .  Filesystems will be repaired by
.Xr fsck 8
as needed.
.Ss Confirmation
The upgrader will warn you if it detects you are not following proper upgrade
procedure either by downgrading or by skipping a release, neither of which is
supported.  It will also warn you if it detects an ABI downgrade.
.Pp
The upgrade will load the upgrade preferences from
.Pa /etc/upgrade.conf
file of the target system as described in
.Xr upgrade.conf 5 .
.Pp
The new release may have a new ABI.  A major ABI change means the new kernel
will be unable to properly execute old programs.  A minor ABI change means the
new kernel has new compatible features and will be able to run older programs,
but older kernels will not be able to run programs using the new ABI.
.Pp
A confirmation screen will tell you what actions the upgrader plan on doing.
Answer
.Sy yes
to proceed with the upgrade.  Otherwise you can escape to a shell, edit
.Xr upgrade.conf 5 ,
return and answer
.Sy no
and the upgrader will reload the configuration.
.Ss Upgrade
The upgrader will take the appropriate actions:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Updating the system.
.It
Updating the ports.
.It
Updating the source code.
.It
Updating the initrd.
.It
Updating the bootloader.
.El
.Ss Completion
The upgrade is now complete. The new system will run after a reboot.  The
upgrader will give you an overview of what it has done.  If you upgraded across
a major ABI change, then you will be told that you need to recompile all local
programs to use the new ABI.
.Pp
Congratulations on your freshly upgraded Sortix system.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr chkblayout 1 ,
.Xr chvideomode 1 ,
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr development 7 ,
.Xr initrd 7 ,
.Xr installation 7 ,
.Xr kernel 7 ,
.Xr user-guide 7 ,
.Xr sysinstall 8 ,
.Xr sysupgrade 8 ,
.Xr update-grub 8 ,
.Xr update-initrd 8
