.Dd $Mdocdate: December 28 2015 $
.Dt USER-GUIDE 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm user-guide
.Nd basic system usage and overview
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Sortix is a small self-hosting Unix-like operating system developed since 2011.
This document covers matters relevant to new users from other Unix-like
operating systems.
.Ss Introduction
The installation process is covered in
.Xr installation 7 .
Bootable cdrom releases will offer the options of running a live environment,
installing the operating system, or upgrading an existing installation.
.Pp
You will be presented a with standard Unix command line environment upon login or
booting the live environment.
.Ss Shutdown
.Xr init 8
spawns a session after boot.  This is
.Xr login 8
if the system is booted in multi-user mode.  This is a root shell if booted in
single-user mode.
.Pp
To power off from the login screen, login as user
.Sy poweroff .
To reboot, login as user
.Sy reboot .
.Pp
To power off from a single-user boot root shell, run
.Sy exit 0
in the shell. To reboot, run
.Sy exit 1
in the shell.
.Ss Keyboard Layout
The kernel has a default US keyboard layout compiled into it.
.Pp
You can change the current keyboard layout using
.Xr chkblayout 1 .
It loads the requested keyboard layout with the requested name from
.Pa /share/kblayout .
For instance to load a Danish keyboard layout:
.Pp
.Dl $ chkblayout dk
.Pp
The system has basic unicode capabilities but the kernel console font is limited
to characters in codepage 437.
.Ss Graphics
The bootloader prepares an appropriate video mode to the best of its abilities.
If you have a supported graphics card:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Xr bga 4 -
Bochs Graphics Adapter found in virtual machines.
.El
.Pp
Then you can run
.Xr chvideomode 1
to change the video mode after boot.
.Pp
.Dl $ chvideomode
.Ss Manual
The system manual can be viewed with the
.Xr man 1
program.  Sortix is currently in the process of being documented and many manual
pages are missing.  The current priority is to document areas specific to Sortix
and assume standard knowledge from other operating system.
.Ss Editor
.Xr editor 1
is the standard text file editor.
.Ss Games
The base system comes with games such as
.Xr asteroids 6 .
Additional third party games may be installed through ports.
.Ss Filesystem Hierarchy
The filesystem hierarchy is described in
.Xr hier 7 .
.Ss Memory Usage
The
.Xr memstat 1
command shows the current memory usage.
.Ss Third Party Software
Releases come with useful third party software installed. The
.Pa /tix/installed.list
file lists all currently installed ports.
.Ss Source Code
Releases come full with the system source code in
.Pa /src
as a
.Xr git 1
repository along with the tools to build it and develop it.  The build
process is covered in
.Xr development 7 .
.Ss Mounting
You can mount ext2 partitions using
.Xr extfs 8
and unmount them with
.Xr unmount 8 :
.Pp
.Dl $ extfs /dev/ahci0p1 /mnt
.Dl $ unmount /mnt
.Pp
Beware that
.Xr init 8
is unaware of manual point points and powering off will not gracefully unmount.
The
.Xr extfs 8
driver only supports the
.Sy large_file
and
.Sy filetype
ext2 extensions.  You can make a compatible filesystem with:
.Pp
.Dl $ mkfs.ext2 -O none,large_file,filetype
.Ss Networking
Sortix does not have networking at this time.  Unix sockets have a basic
implementation incapable of advanced features.  The standard library and
kernel provides stubs for many network interfaces.
.Ss Serial Transfer
It is possible to transfer files over serial devices as described in
.Xr serial-transfer 7 .
.Ss Development
The system is self-hosting and is capable of building itself as described in
.Xr development 7 .
Ports are cross-compiled as described in
.Xr cross-development 7 ,
but it is becoming feasible to build a large number of them natively.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cross-development 7 ,
.Xr development 7 ,
.Xr installation 7 ,
.Xr serial-transfer 7 ,
.Xr upgrade 7
