.Dd $Mdocdate: January 4 2016 $
.Dt UPGRADE.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm upgrade.conf
.Nd upgrade configuration
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/upgrade.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm upgrade.conf
controls the actions taken by
.Xr sysupgrade 8
during a system upgrade as described in
.Xr upgrade 7 .
The file allows customizing whether the system itself is replaced, whether new
ports are installed, whether the new source code is installed and what happens
to the old source code.  It also records information about the system such as
how the system is booted. The file is created automatically by
.Xr sysinstall 8
as part of
.Xr installation 7
to match what was installed.
.Pp
Developers may wish to customize what happens to
.Pa /src
on a system upgrade. The new source code can be installed or not. If it is
installed, it can be installed in
.Pa /newsrc
or by default in
.Pa /src .
Any existing source code will be safely moved inside a subdirectory of
.Pa /oldsrc .
.Pp
It is possible to disable any upgrading whatsoever.  If you do this, except the
new source code is installed, then you can upgrade to the new system manually as
described in
.Xr development 7 .
Upgrading to the next release from source is not supported.
.Sh FORMAT
The file is read line by line. The # character starts a comment and the rest of
the line is ignored. Lines are supposed to contain assignments to variables.  An
assignment is the name of the variable, whitespace, an equal character,
whitespace, the value, whitespace, and then the end of the line.
.Bl -tag -width "12345678"
.It Sy grub Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc (default Sy no ) .
States GRUB is used as the bootloader.  If either the
.Sy system
or
.Sy ports
are set to
.Sy yes ,
then the bootloader is reinstalled
.Xr ( grub-install 8 )
and updated
.Xr ( update-grub 8 ) .
.It Sy newsrc Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc (default Sy no ) .
Place the new source code in
.Pa /newsrc
and move any existing
.Pa /newsrc
into
.Pa /oldsrc .
This preserves the current
.Pa /src
directory.  This takes precedence over and disables the behavior described under
.Sy src .
.It Sy ports Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc (default Sy yes ) .
Install the new ports.
.It Sy src Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc (default Sy no ) .
Place the new source code in
.Pa /src
and move any existing
.Pa /src
into
.Pa /oldsrc .
.It Sy system Ns "=" Ns Oo Sy no "|" yes Oc (default Sy yes ) .
Install the new system.  This will run
.Xr update-initrd 8
and if
.Sy grub
is set to
.Sy no ,
then regenerate
.Pa /etc/grub.d/10_sortix.cache .
.El
.Pp
The defaults will be used if
.Pa /etc/upgrade.conf
is missing.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/upgrade.conf" -compact
.It Pa /etc/upgrade.conf
Upgrade configuration.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
system = yes
ports = yes
src = no
grub = yes
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr upgrade 7 ,
.Xr sysupgrade 8
